from an evolutionary perspective
sleep is the most idiotic of all
behaviors
you know when you think about it because
firstly when you're asleep you're not
finding a mate you're not reproducing
you're not caring for your young you're
not foraging for food and worse still
you're vulnerable to predation
now on any one of those single grounds
but especially all of them as a
collective
sleep should have been strongly selected
against
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory i am here with somebody
that's going to blow your mind his name
is matthew walker
matthew welcome to the show
it's a delight to be here tom thank you
for having me dude super excited i was
telling you before we started recording
that uh you wrote a book called why we
sleep
and i'm always worried when i'm bringing
somebody on that's covering a subject
that i've talked about before if they're
going to hit it in a new way and i loved
your book you come at it from a totally
different angle i wore my brain shirt
out of acknowledgement of
how much you talk about sleep and the
neurological impact and so i want to
start with
two things from the book that really
blew my mind and the first is
that sleep is so
important that the guinness book of
world records will not let people try to
set records for sleep deprivation
walk us through why not i think this is
a great entry to your world
yes so what we know is that a lack of
sleep
will
impact just about every major
physiological system in your body and
almost every operation of your mind for
example if i were to take you and limit
you to just four hours of sleep for one
single night
there is almost a 70 drop in what we
call natural killer cell activity which
are critical anti-cancer fighting immune
cells that's after one night or four
hours of sleep that's crazy secondly if
i were to short sleep you for just one
week your levels of testosterone would
be that of someone 10 years your senior
defined surgery
what how many hours so here we could be
talking about four to five hours a night
for four or five nights in a row which
if you look at the data on the survey
that's not unusual for perhaps even 20
to 30 percent of the population
certainly during the week
we also know from daylight savings time
that it doesn't take very much
because there is a global experiment
that's performed on about 1.6 billion
people across 70 countries twice a year
and it's called daylight savings time
now in the spring when we lose one hour
of sleep we see a 24
increase in heart attacks the following
day yes in the autumn in the fall we see
a 21
decrease in heart attacks
now you collide all of that information
together as well as the impact on the
brain the mental health issues regarding
anxiety suicidality depression as well
as increased risk for alzheimer's
disease and we've been seeing that as
well
all of these things created this perfect
storm for guinness to take a step back
they used to recognize world
record-breaking attempts
and to put this in context
you know several years ago a remarkable
individual i think his name was felix
baumgardner an austrian
um with red bull he went up in a space
capsule he went to the outer edges of
our atmosphere of our planet he opened
the door
and then in a space suit he jumped out
he hurtled back down to earth at over a
thousand kilometers per hour he broke
the sound barrier with his body
and
guinness says
that's just fine however sleep
deprivation attempts no longer because
they are that much more concerning to
your mental your physical and your
cognitive health
that is the perfect explanation like
that dichotomy of felix baumgartner
versus just not getting enough sleep and
i don't think it's a mistake that the
navy seals use it just catastrophic
sleep deprivation as a part of their
hell week to really find out like who's
got the mental resilience to make it on
the other side
because when you're talking because i if
i remember right they get like
three hours of sleep over five days or
just something stupid like that
remarkably minimal and they start
hallucinating you know i had a friend
who was um he was in the british version
of that um and they were saying you know
they were running around on these hills
during sort of these combat training
events and they were just seeing sort of
gravestones popping up in front of them
they were just delusional and
hallucinating
what's going on like what is it that
causes us to hallucinate do we know the
mechanism whatever breakdown there is
between the conscious and subconscious
mind i'm not even sure what's happening
yeah what we think is happening is that
after some degree of sleep deprivation
you build up this pressure for the
different stages of sleep and one of the
two main stages of sleep of human sleep
at least is something called rapid eye
movement sleep or rem sleep which is the
stage that is principally associated
with dreaming
and what we've learned is that once you
start to go through sleep deprivation
and including rem sleep deprivation the
brain gets so starved of this thing
called dream sleep
that it just simply says look
at at some point i've got to get this
thing called rem sleep and if you're
going to stay awake i don't really care
i'm just going to produce this state of
rem sleep and so it's almost as though
you're awake but the veil of rem sleep
dreaming comes over the brain and
therefore you're essentially dreaming
while you're awake and that's why you
start seeing these hallucinations and
delusions that's our current
understanding all right now that's
really interesting so one one of the
questions i was most excited to ask you
about is the nature of dreaming
so
if the brain is saying hey look i'm
going to do this whether you're awake or
asleep
why is it so contextual like there's no
question there are times where the dream
is so bizarre like i can't anchor it to
my life but a lot of times i can where
i'm like i know exactly why i started
dreaming about that thing
do we have a sense of what the brain is
trying to do
with dreams
we do and dreaming seems to offer at
least two different benefits for the
brain the first is creativity the second
is essentially emotional first aid it's
overnight therapy
so
point number one creativity
one of the things that rem sleep
actually does is
it takes all of the information that
you've been learning and i should take a
step back it's during deep sleep which
actually happens more in the first half
of the night that those memories those
freshly minted memories that you've
recently learned and laid down in the
brain
deep sleep will hit the save button on
those new memories so that you don't
forget
so so deep sleep strengthens and
solidifies those individual memories
but sleep we've learned is much more
intelligent than we ever imagined
because thereafter it's dream sleep it's
rem sleep that takes all of those
individual memories and it starts to
intelligently collide them and
interconnect them essentially it's
informational alchemy
but you could almost think of it like um
group therapy for memories that you know
everyone gets a name badge and rem sleep
gathers in all of these pieces
and it forces you to go and speak to the
people not at the front of the room that
you think you've got the most obvious
connection with but to the people at the
back of the room that you think you've
got no connection with at all but it
turns out that you do it's a non-obvious
one but it's a potentially powerful one
nonetheless
and so after dream sleep you wake up
with essentially a revised mind wide web
of associations every single day and as
a consequence you are able to define
solutions to previously impenetrable
problems
and it's the very reason that no one has
ever told you to stay awake on a problem
and that's one of the benefits of dream
sleep of rem sleep
the second however is something that
we've more recently discovered and we've
done a lot of work in this area
regarding mental health
is that rem sleep provides this
emotional first aid
and what seems to happen is that
sleep will take in these difficult
often concerning even painful traumatic
emotional experiences
and dream sleep acts like this beautiful
nocturnal soothing bomb and it just
takes the sharp edges off those painful
difficult experiences so that you come
back the next day
and they don't feel as difficult anymore
so in other words it's not time that
heals all wounds but it's time during
sleep that provides that emotional
convalescence as it were
so why does this relate to your question
which is
there are times when it seems strange
and there are times when i can
definitely pick it up what we know
de facto definitively
is that
dreaming is not simply you rewinding the
videotape of the day and then playing it
back over again in fact only about five
percent of your dreaming life is a
veritable replay of anything you
experience during the day
however what is dominant if there is a
if there's a red thread narrative that
runs through from your waking life into
your dreaming life it is emotional
themes and concerns
that's the sort of mental health benefit
that's the mental first aid the
emotional first aid so the emotional
first aid was the second thing that i
wanted to talk about that was one of the
the most striking things about your book
and i want to go a little bit deeper
so much around dreaming i don't i don't
want to stray too far from that there's
so many more questions i have about
dreaming but talk to me about some of
the research with um
noradrenaline and ptsd and the work
there because this was where i was like
whoa there is a layer to sleep that i've
never heard anybody talk about the way
that you're talking about it this is
really fascinating
yeah so several years ago um i developed
a theory as to exactly how this
emotional first aid would actually work
were
it it's what's remarkable about dreaming
it's the only time during the 24-hour
period where your brain shuts off this
stress-related neurochemical called
noradrenaline we never see it at any
other time any other stage of sleep or
any time when you're awake
and
the sister chemical everyone will know
about in the body which is called
adrenaline but upstairs in the brain
it's noradrenaline
and i propose that what happens during
dream sleep which is remarkable is that
firstly we know from brain imaging
studies that we've done where we put
people inside of a scanner and we watch
their brain as it lights up as it goes
into dream sleep
emotional centers of the brain and
memory centers of the brain are
reactivated during dream sleep
so firstly we know that the brain is
capable and is probably reactivating
these emotional experiences
but secondly unlike when you're awake
it's reactivating and re sort of um
playing those memories in a brain state
that is devoid of any of this stress
related neurochemical
and so in other words dream sleep we
sort of put forward as a theory allows
the brain to take
this sort of highly charged emotional
memory and strip away the bitter
emotional rind from the informational
orange so that you come back the next
day and it's peeled away
and as a consequence dream sleep has
divorced the emotion from the memory
because of this neurochemical state this
kind of mollifying soothing
neurochemical bath are you familiar with
what they're studying with mdma because
it feels to me like the same idea right
so hey i've got this guy that has ptsd
i'm going to make him relive it but i'm
going to hit him with mdma which
neurochemically is going to move him
into a radically different state they
now revisit the same emotion because for
and look you know so much more about
this than i do but i find this so
interesting you will correct me where i
go wrong
but we're not we're not faithful to the
truth of what has happened in our past
we pull a memory forward as we're sort
of holding it in working memory it
becomes manipulatable and then when we
restore it it's restored with whatever
new context we give it so if you revisit
you can make it worse or you can make it
better
and that feels like it's an echo of this
mechanism that you're talking about in
dreams
it's exactly that and you know and what
we know is that when i was describing
that deep sleep hits the save button on
those new memories that's what we call
consolidation but there's also a process
of reconsolidation you're absolutely
right and a great analogy here is a word
document you know you'd never open up a
word document and then create a new set
of sort of text which is the memory then
hit the save button and then double
click it the next day open it back up
and you can't do anything with it you
can't change it you can't edit it
that's a ridiculous system of storage of
information storage
and the brain works just like that when
you recall a memory a memory once you've
hit the save button is not simply
permanent and immutable it's modifiable
and you can change it and modify it and
then you can reconsolidate it you can
resave it now it's edited and that's
what therapy does that's what we think
happens with mdma that's what we think
is partly happening with dream sleep but
dream sleep is quite different there
it's this neurochemical strange state
that allows you to sort of soothe that
memory as well and as i said sort of
strip away it's almost like detoxifying
the memory of the emotion so that you
come back the next day and you have a
memory of an emotional event but it's no
longer emotional itself and so i had a
theory that was in search of data and i
went to a conference in seattle
and i presented the theory and then the
next person up was a psychiatrist called
murray raskin and he was working in the
va system with veterans who had terrible
ptsd and he was treating them with a
blood pressure medication that was
generic because it's the va system
and that blood pressure medication was
called prazosine now practicing will
actually cross the blood-brain barrier
it will not only affect the body it'll
go up into the brain and one of the
things that it shuts off is
noradrenaline
and what we knew before is that in ptsd
those patients have too high levels of
noradrenaline
and what he was finding and scratching
his head over was to say look i've been
treating these patients with this blood
pressure medication
and they're coming back to me because
one of by the way one of the diagnostic
features of ptsd is repetitive
nightmares in fact you can't get a
diagnosis of ptsd without having
repetitive nightmares
and so he was coming
these patients were coming back to him
and saying look doc i i don't know if my
blood pressure is any better but my
trauma dreams are starting to go away
and i don't know why and he was
publishing this data
so
i had a and that's exactly what the
model would predict that in ptsd levels
of noradrenaline are too high so the
brain is unable to do this elegant trick
of stripping the emotion from the memory
so the next night
when they come back to dream the brain
comes back and sleep to sleep and says
look i've still got this highly charged
trauma memory please do your trick of
separating emotion from memory it fails
again it's a broken record it is the
repetitive nightmares of ptsd
and i said look i i've got to speak with
you um i flew him down to berkeley um a
few weeks later we had spent the whole
day together we went out to dinner we
just jammed on this he started doing
these remarkable studies with prasasin
looking at rem sleep looking at dreaming
and several years later it became the
one of the only approved medications for
repetitive nightmares uh in ptsd
wow dude that that to me is like just
when it feels like man we really know a
lot about something and then a
breakthrough like that will occur this
whole
field of beginning to really understand
because when the the title of the book
why do we sleep
is
no one's been able to give a satisfying
answer to that like you get a lot of
these hypotheses but this is really
starting to feel like we're at the
beginning of
beginning to understand some of the
stuff so
give us the explanation in in sort of an
evolutionary context of why we know
sleeping
just absolutely has to be crushingly
important
yeah and i'll just touch on your first
point which is to say you're right you
know the book was um called why we sleep
because we do have now a pretty good
understanding 50 years ago
you know we used to ask the question why
do we sleep and the the crass and
unhelpful answer was at the time was
that we sleep to cure sleepiness
which is the the fat just equivalent of
saying and you would know this better
than anyone you know i eat to cure
hunger well that tells you nothing about
the nutritional dynamics of food
but it was the best that we had at the
time now 50 years later where there were
over 10 000 empirical research studies
we've actually had to upend the question
we've actually now had to ask is there
anything within the body any major
physiological system in the body or any
sort of major function of the mind that
isn't wonderfully enhanced by sleep when
we get it or demonstrably impaired when
we don't get enough
and so far the answer seems to be no for
the most part
so sort of to come back to your sort of
the second part of the question you know
from an evolutionary perspective
sleep is the most idiotic of all
behaviors
you know when you think about it because
firstly when you're asleep you're not
finding a mate you're not reproducing
you're not caring for your young you're
not foraging for food and worse still
you're vulnerable to predation
now on any one of those single grounds
but especially all of them as a
collective
sleep should have been strongly selected
against in the course of evolution
but what we know is that sleep if you
look from an evolutionary perspective
sleep appears to have evolved with life
itself on this planet
and then it has fought its way through
heroically every step along the
evolutionary pathway
and it's long been said that as a
consequence if sleep doesn't serve an
absolutely vital set of functions then
it is the biggest mistake that the
evolutionary process has ever made
and what we're now learning from the
science is that mother nature did not
make a spectacular blunder in creating
this beautiful thing called a full night
of sleep
yeah it's really interesting to think
through
and one of the things that
gave me the first hook into why sleep
might be ridiculously important
is the fact that when you're sleeping
the brain actually shrinks and allows
you to clear out
amyloid plaques and like basically
you're brainwashing
yourself literally washing your brain
yeah um at night the glymphatic system
and and then i was like okay that's
interesting that you would need to go
into sort of this altered state to clear
this stuff out
um
that to me gets interesting what have
you found there in the
literature
that
shows that it needs to specifically be
an altered state
yeah we never thought that the brain had
its own cleansing mechanism
um and we all know that the body has
that mechanism it's called the lymphatic
system but it was only um probably six
or seven years ago that a remarkable
scientist macon nedergaard at the
university of rochester made a stunning
set of discoveries in mice what she
found was that the brain actually does
have its own cleansing system it's
called the glymphatic system named after
the glial cells in the brain that make
it up
now if that wasn't remarkable enough she
went on to find two additional
discoveries
the first is that
that sewage system is not always
switched on in high flow volume across
the 24-hour period
it's specifically during deep sleep when
that um that cleansing mechanism kicks
into high gear and as you said these
brain cells will actually shrink
and allowing the cerebrospinal fluid to
wash away all of the metabolic detritus
that's been building up whilst we're
awake because make no mistake about it
from a biochemical perspective
wakefulness is low level brain damage
and sleep is sanitary salvation
and
the third thing that you discovered
which is something you mentioned there
one of the pieces of toxic metabolic
protein product that that cleansing
system was washing away was something
called beta amyloid which is what we
know is a protein culprit in the cascade
of alzheimer's disease and we've now
done a lot of work and others have done
this work showing that insufficient
sleep may be one of the most significant
lifestyle factors determining whether or
not you will develop alzheimer's disease
in later life and it seems to be that
it's this particular state of deep sleep
and these pulsing these slow pulsing
electrical big powerful brain waves that
happen during deep sleep that may be
driving the pulsing of this
cerebrospinal fluid and this is
wonderful work by laura lewis at boston
university most recently in humans
that are coupled to the brain waves that
you have so the reason that it's this
specific state which was your question
why deep sleep in particular because
it's only that time period where we get
these huge powerful deep brain waves and
we get the shrinking of the cells and we
get therefore the flow of this pulsing
glymphatic system so in other words it's
it's almost like a power cleanse for
your brain you know it's good night
sleep clean as it were in that regard so
complex it's crazy this is exactly why i
don't like to take supplements it's like
man there there are levels of complexity
that i assure you we have not discovered
yet and you never know like the heart
medication that's also oh this one's
bypassing the brain and dealing with
noradrenaline and it has this huge
impact now that one happens to be
positive but there are some in certain
cases but there are some that very much
are not and speaking of are not positive
so if sleep is so good for me and dreams
are amazing and they help with
creativity and they they take the sharp
edges off my emotions why the hell do i
have nightmares
yeah so what we know is that nightmares
aren't necessarily pathological um and
we
we know that in some conditions and ptsd
is a is a very good example of this that
they can sort of step over that
threshold from being normative to
non-normative i mean they can be very
concerning and
and disruptive to people and it's also
very traumatic too to relive those and
and wake up from them we do think it's
part of the same process of sort of
emotional regulation but it's the brain
trying to understand and better
comprehend what this thing called waking
life and all of its emotional peaks and
troughs are all about so
the bottom line here is that as long as
they're not causing you distress and
harm then you don't have to worry about
them
if they are doing that though there are
new clinical therapies for
what we call nightmare
disorders
and it involves usually just what you
were describing before which is speaking
with a therapist writing down
the nightmare and then replaying it
while you are awake sort of you know
speaking about it writing it back down
working with the therapist and
essentially trying to sort of just say
look okay in that context it's safe
let's better understand that
and repeatedly doing that type of work
where you're sort of
reactivating the nightmare and then
trying to change the context to
something that's safe or that's less
fearful or that's less negative
gradually over time that type of work
can dissipate the frequency and the
severity of those nightmares so
nightmares by themselves not necessarily
a bad thing if they are causing you
problems you can go and speak to your
doctor and there are some therapies for
that that you can sort of just google
around
nightmare therapy etc
those will help
yeah and
that like the way in which your brain
chooses to interpret
its sort of dream reassessment of the
real world will have huge implications
in your life it could be ptsd it could
be a bazillion things i have a feeling
i've never had this thought before but i
have a feeling that
the more we learn about how individual
brains recontextualize things and how
much the conscious mind and subconscious
mind sort of come into cahoots to decide
how they're going to line things up
because when i was in my early 20s and i
was convinced i was stupid i was
interpreting the world one way that was
just had me paralyzed by fear and then
as i began to realize sort of the nature
of the brain and oh just because i'm
stupid now doesn't mean i can't learn
about this
you know that carol dweck's notion of
yet right i'm not good yet and so that
since then consciously i have changed
the way that i frame things
but i would bet a bazillion dollars that
i'm also doing that subconsciously as my
brain sort of
processes the day
i think that's what you know dreaming if
it's one of its functions is that
recontextualizing of those experiences
you know dreaming i think is a is a way
for us to understand the world in which
we live
and we can do it whilst we're awake you
know i'm not suggesting that we don't
form connections and we don't see
links between different pieces of
information but the way that we do it in
dreaming is very different you know i
often liken it to when we're awake
you're sort of inputting this
information into the brain and it's
almost like a google search page one
where you insert your search term you
hit return and you get the most obvious
immediate hits the direct connections
that's what waking is all about
dreaming is you inserting the search
term hitting the return button and being
taken straight to page 20.
you know and you inserted you know
impact theory university
and all of a sudden on page 20 it's
about a field hockey game in utah and
you think hang on a second what on earth
is but then you read it and you think
ah i can it's a distant wacky connection
and it's not obvious to me that i would
have made that but it's a potentially
powerful one because when you start to
fuse things together that shouldn't
normally go together but they cause
these marked advances evolutionary
fitness it sounds like the biological
basis of creativity
and that's one of the things that we're
learning about with dream sleep as well
contextualization emotional resolution
creativity
yeah so
you know as we start talking about
dreaming and nightmares and all of the
different ways that the brain is sort of
interacting
uh
trying to make sense of the conscious
world one thing i heard you talk about
is cognitive behavioral therapy for
insomnia which i found
very interesting and i know so little
about it but knowing what i know about
cognitive behavioral therapy in terms of
pattern interrupting and things like
that are you is this like us sending a
sort of subconscious signal to our brain
like how does that work
not quite so i what we know obviously
has been the rise of sleep difficulties
in society and that has been matched by
unfortunately a rise in pharmacology and
particularly sleeping pills and i say
unfortunately not because i'm
anti-medication and i know a lot of
people who work at these pharmaceutical
companies and they're good people great
scientists wanting to do good things
but unfortunately sleeping pills are
largely blunt instruments and they don't
produce naturalistic sleep
they're in a class of drugs that we call
the sedative hypnotics
and when we take sleeping pills we
mistake sedation for sleep but it's not
natural sleep and in fact
sleeping pills have been associated with
a significantly higher risk of death as
well as cancer
so much so that in 2016 the american
college of physicians made a landmark
recommended
intervention they said that sleeping
pills must no longer be the first line
treatment for
insomnia instead the american college of
physicians said it has to be cognitive
behavioral therapy for insomnia that
must be the first line recommended
treatment for those sleep problems
and so cognitive behavioral therapy in
general really tries to target two
things cognitive
and behavioral
and so the cognitive aspects for
insomnia are aspects where we try to
correct your beliefs or your misbeliefs
around sleep and some of your ideas
around sleep some of those things that
can be either inappropriate incorrect or
just triggering anxiety or worry
so we try to modify those cognitions
those beliefs but then we also look at
what you're doing in your life the
different behaviors that you're doing or
things that you're not doing
and try to correct the behaviors as well
for example how's your caffeine intake
how's your alcohol intake uh what time
are you going to bed what time you're
waking up what's your chronotype are you
a morning type evening type are you
sleeping in harmony with your chronotype
or against your chronotype
um are you getting daylight in the
morning are you getting too much
daylight
light at night artificial light at night
do you exercise
and so we change behaviors and we change
thought patterns and together
cognitive behavioral therapy for
insomnia is just as effective as
sleeping pills in the short term but
what's great is that when you start
working with that clinician
or your online program and i should say
that i um i'm i work with a company i'm
an advisor to a company called chuni um
it's s-h-u-n-i
dot io if people want to go and explore
it and you can get cognitive behavioral
therapy online there but you work with
your therapist and after about
five or six sessions
you can continue that benefit of
improved sleep for up to five years the
studies have demonstrated now whereas
with sleeping pills when you stop their
use
then not only do you go back to the bad
sleep that you perhap you are having you
typically go back to even worse sleep
it's called rebound insomnia and now you
have to go back onto the use so you
become dependent there is an addiction
dependency cycle so that's really what
cbti is and that's really the best
approach for sleeping uh problems right
now
all right so i have two
sleeping problems one is that there are
times where i will get
um either really stressed or i'll get
really excited and i have a very easy
time falling asleep but then i'll wake
up after three or four hours
and i find it very difficult to fall
back asleep
and then the second part just so i don't
forget is sleep inertia in the morning
but what can i do to
optimize for staying asleep
yes so there it's a case of trying to
deal with that sort of downgrade the
activation of the nervous system the
reason that people typically wake up uh
in the middle of the night and can't get
back to sleep not always but often is
because they have this sort of stress
reliever carrying this anxiety and
anxiety biologically is the principal
mechanism that we think underlies most
insomnia and what happens in part is
that the fight or flight branch of the
nervous system becomes overactive
and that's exactly why does it shut down
like i find it so easy to fall asleep
but i can tell on the nights where i'm
gonna wake up
yeah it just seems weird
but then my subconscious mind kicks it
back alive yeah why why would it be that
way and the reason is because after
about 16 hours of wakefulness you've
built up a lot of that healthy
sleepiness what we call sleep pressure
and the longer that you're awake the
more of that sleep pressure builds up
and it's a chemical that builds up in
the brain called adenosine
and then when we go into sleep it's the
time when the brain can actually start
to clear out that adenosine and it's so
it starts to lower the sleep pressure
and after about eight hours of sleep
you've cleared away 16 hours of that
adenosine of that sleepiness and so you
wake up naturally and you feel refreshed
and restored
but what will happen is that you can be
stressed and sort of or excited but the
sleeping the weight of sleepiness
pulling you down is so heavy at that
point that you can get to sleep but then
three or four hours later you jettisoned
maybe 50 of all of that adenosine maybe
even more because it principally happens
during deep sleep
and so now your brain is much more
vulnerable to those awakenings because
it doesn't have the weight of that
sleepiness does that make some sense it
makes total sense and it makes me want
to punch myself back to sleep
it's so obnoxious
well because the benefits or i should
say the
the damage that you do by not getting
sleep is so
terrifying that every time i wake up i'm
like
come on like you know how much better
you will perform if you just sleep and i
am not one of those guys that's like hey
you gotta grind in four hours sleep i'm
like if i need nine hours of sleep i
want to get nine hours of sleep every
single night forever until the end of
time
so it's just always super nice if you're
hoisting that flag i will salute it and
i definitely
you know not everyone but certainly in
the type a sort of particularly business
culture maybe there is this sort of
sleep machismo attitude where people
were there lack of sleep like a badge of
honor um but you're right it's it's
foolhardy for a number of reasons but
let me come back to that issue of you
know beating ourselves up because
we need to have some degree of self
compassion when it comes to sleep you
know i am not invulnerable to sleep
problems myself i've had bouts of
insomnia throughout my life to be
completely transparent and open with you
um
and
everyone every one of us is gonna have a
bad night of sleep it's not unusual
don't worry don't stress you know back
when i was starting to write the book it
took me about four years to write it in
2014 you know sleep was sort of the
neglected stepsister in the health
conversation of that time
and i was so saddened by the sickness
and the disease and the suffering that
was happening because of a lack of sleep
you know i came out you know all guns
blazing
and
i think that that was important but
for those people who were struggling
with sleep those people who had sleep
problems with insomnia
you know the book kind of felt almost as
though it was you know sleep or else dot
dot dot um
and i didn't mean it to be that way so i
want to say right now because i've
learned to soften and become a much
better appreciator of these conditions
just like you described
if you wake up and you can't get back to
sleep don't worry just realize tonight
is not my night it's not the end of the
world i'm still going to be able to
function somewhat tomorrow
don't stay in bed awake for too long
though that's the important message here
because it's very tricky i'm super
curious to see what you think about yes
because i know where you're going right
you're training yourself that being in
bed is is being awake is okay while
you're in bed so that's right i used to
get up and whether i slept for two hours
three hours whatever if i couldn't fall
back asleep in like 15 minutes i'd get
out of bed
and i would go to work and start doing
my thing and then i would go lay back
down and sleep and sometimes i'd fall
asleep for you know two or three more
hours but the number of times i would
wake up with a headache after that was
just too much so i was way frustrated
and i'm like all right there's got to be
something else so what i found is if i
put an audio book on dude i will be back
asleep in like 10 or 15 minutes it's
crazy and the only thing that wakes me
up is the fact that i have
headphones in my ears or if they start
yelling in the book or something like
that which always pisses me off uh but
it puts me back to sleep so reliably
it's crazy
that's great that's exactly what we
recommend so don't go to work don't
start checking emails don't eat because
it trains the brain to expect food but
instead in a dim room somewhere
different so you change the context so
you're changing the learned association
just read a book listen to an audio book
meditate in dim light all of these
things are great find out whatever works
for you
and then only when you're sleepy do you
return to bed and there's no time limit
for that
and that way you train the brain back
out of a bad association that it's
learned which is my bed is this place of
being awake which if you repeat that
over time you become trained to be awake
in the bed
and then you will relearn the
association that your bed is the place
where you're asleep so you're 100 right
that's exactly what we recommend
um to your second question which is
sleep inertia it's a real thing sleep
inertia is typically where we wake up
and
your brain requires some time to kind of
warm up to operating temperature like an
old vintage car you know you can't just
turn the engine on and start you know
flooring it and going up to redline you
need to sort of circulate the fluids and
warm the oil up and get the engine warm
and then you can really start to push it
it's the same way with our brain in some
ways now
different people have different
severities of sleep inertia i'm actually
like you i suffer from quite bad sleep
inertia you know for the first hour you
know my partnership when i come through
in the morning she wakes up a little bit
earlier than me you know she kind of
knows that i can say look honey i am not
the best version of myself in the first
hour i i know that i may have done
something bad yesterday and we should
talk about it and i want to resolve that
but
can we not do it in the first hour
because i'm not the best version so
firstly accepting that it's normal and
it's real
the second thing though however is
you can
sleep inertia typically happens in very
severe amounts if you're mismatched
between your sleep schedule
and your chronotype schedule
and so you can go on
and you can go online and type google
and morningness eveningness questioner
and it's a questionnaire that you fill
out and it figures out what your
chronotype is are you a morning type
somewhere in between or are you an
evening type
and what we find is that morning types
when they wake up in the morning at
their normal time which is very early or
early
they don't have sleep inertia they're
good to go they can jump into the gym
and they're like energize a bunnies and
they're all happy and you know joyful
and to me i'm just like oh
you know
whereas evening types waking up at the
time that morning types have to wake up
which is in some ways the way society is
designed society is desperately biased
against evening types
and wrongfully so because it's not your
fault it's genetically determined there
are about six or seven genes that we
know right now that dictate what your
chronotype is it's not your fault it's
gifted to you at birth
you don't get to choose
now if you are suffering from sleep
inertia what
we find is that if you can
sleep a little bit later into the
morning go to bed maybe a little bit
later sleep later play around with that
and see if the speed with which you wake
up
is better that your sleep inertia is
less
that's one way it may not always work
another way is temperature
now it turns out that when people have a
cup of coffee they say look i just need
like five minutes and i swig a couple of
you know mouthfuls of coffee and now i'm
alert that's nonsense caffeine doesn't
actually get into your system until
about 12 to 15 minutes so if you're
feeling any effects of caffeine before
that it's not the caffeine
it turns out that
when we go to sleep
we drop off our core body temperature we
get very cold we become
almost hypothermic
now to wake up we have to warm up
so to to get to sleep we need to get
cold to stay asleep we need to stay cold
and to wake up we need to warm up
and so one way that you can artificially
accelerate or try accelerating
your inertia in a quicker dissipating
manner is to try to warm up more quickly
so get a hot drink in the morning
doesn't have to be caffeine if that's
not your thing i don't drink caffeine
but i'm not against it
caffeine is an issue
it's not really the dose that makes the
poison it's the timing that makes the
poison when it comes to sleep and
caffeine which we can come on to but
drink a hot drink get your body
temperature up if you like if you've got
a smart thermostat program it to start
to rise temperature in your bedroom or
in the house in the last hour before
your alarm
and you can it can really start to help
you wake up and then play around with
these smart lights i have one where it
sort of starts to bring me out of sleep
about five minutes before my alarm that
can help but the data is not good on
that the data on temperature much better
does that help you tom it does but i'm
surprised that you say to get warm
because have you done cold showers
before
yeah cold showers are a
sort of more of a nora adrenaline thing
yes they they wake you up really
they do now that's not necessarily a
normative thing you know that's you
you know shocking your fight or flight
branch of the nervous system to go from
a temperature that it's become
accustomed to and it's acclimated to so
then all of a sudden being dumped in ice
water as it were and it doesn't know
it's a threat mechanism it thinks you're
under attack and so of course you're
going to wake up
now that comes with an adrenergic spike
in the body it comes with an accelerated
heart rate it could come with a cortisol
spike so i'm not against that
but we don't have to go to those
extremes you can do it in these more
subtle manners which are the more
natural ways
fair enough
um
i have a question going back to waking
up in the middle of the night
one thing that is super weird is things
that during the day
are not in any way shape or form
intimidating or daunting
when i'm supposed to be sleeping so if i
wake up in the middle of the night i'll
start stressing about something and i'll
i'm literally like once i get out of bed
this is not going to stress me out so
why is it stressing me out at night is
there a part of my brain that shuts off
is there a part of my brain that becomes
active like why are things at night do
they seem so big and dramatic whereas in
the day it's like man it's not a big
deal
yeah i we actually don't really fully
understand in truth but part of this is
to do with context that it's dark
you don't have full awareness you don't
have full
functioning of the brain because when we
wake up that sleep inertia by the way in
part is because your prefrontal cortex
which is the part of the brain that
makes us most human it's like the ceo of
the brain it's very good at
understanding high-level concepts
putting things into contextually
appropriate boxes making top-down
control decisions it regulates our
emotions that part of the brain is the
last thing to come back online as we
wake up and that's why we're not very
you know brilliant if we have sleep
inertia but when we're waking up out of
sleep in the middle of the night we also
have some of that so we don't have the
rational logical part of our brain fully
engaged plus the context is one that's
dark and so we don't have sort of the
daylight sort of giving us this sort of
normative safe feeling and so what
happens is that the brain starts to
default to rumination and
catastrophization
you know it's almost like this rolodex
of anxiety that then starts to unfold
and that one memory that you know you
bring back into mind
at that moment of waking up is the
finger that flicks the domino on that
cascade of you know rumination so
again just realize i've done this before
i've experienced this before i know that
tomorrow by you know one or two p.m in
the afternoon i think about this and i
think that was ridiculous to be worrying
about it's it's okay try to remind
yourself of that no question dude thank
you so much for joining me today the way
that you look at sleep your insights
they are absolutely magically delicious
where can people
keep up with you where can they get the
book uh what's the best way oh gosh
after listening so long to this they
shouldn't listen to any more of me but
um if you want to find more of me uh you
can find me at sleep diplomat that's my
handle sleepdiplomat.com
um you can buy the book the book is
called why we sleep it's now out in the
second edition following some uh needed
corrections um
you my publisher would say you know you
don't have to read the book you just
have to buy it but i would say um go and
find a second-hand used copy of the book
um i'm uninterested in any of the money
just as long as you read the book i'm
happy so um
yeah awesome thank you again so much for
what you're putting out in the world and
for coming onto the show it was really
really wonderful speaking of things that
are really wonderful if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you